Water Hammer Tutorial (#660)
precice/tutorials: water-hammer/README.md

---
title: Partitioned Water Hammer

> keywords: OpenFOAM, Nutils, preCICE, multiscale, fluid, transient

Reviewer: Since "multiscale" can also refer to micro-macro coupling:

```suggestion
keywords: OpenFOAM, Nutils, preCICE, geometric-multiscale, fluid, transient
```

summary: The Partitioned Water Hammer tutorial simulates unsteady pressure wave propagation in pipe systems using different 1D and 3D configurations coupled via preCICE.
---

## Setup

We solve a **partitioned water hammer problem** using a 1D–3D coupling approach.  
In this tutorial, the computational domain is split into two coupled regions: a 1D pipe section and a 3D pipe section.  
The coupling is performed using **preCICE**.

> Case setup inspired by [1].  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The case setup is inspired by [1].  
```

This tutorial extends the study conducted in [2], which implemented the water hammer benchmark using a 1D-3D coupling with preCICE.  

> In that study, the cross-section of the pipe was squared. It has been changed to a circular cross-section in the present tutorial.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In that study, the cross-section of the pipe was square. In this tutorial, this has been changed to a circular cross-section.
```

> `1D` denotes the reduced-order domain (e.g., a Nutils solver) and `3D` denotes the full 3D CFD domain (e.g., OpenFOAM).

Reviewer: I would avoid starting a sentence with a code snippet or number:

```suggestion
In the following, `1D` denotes the reduced-order domain (e.g., a Nutils solver) and `3D` denotes the full 3D CFD domain (e.g., OpenFOAM).
```

> The problem consists of a straight pipe of length `L = 1000 m` and diameter `D = 2 m`.  

Reviewer: You can also use math mode, if you want: https://precice.org/docs-meta-cheatsheet.html#latex-math-syntax

Reviewer: We still need to make these inline. Note also some `\text{1D}` and similar above.

The **1D domain** solves the unsteady compressible flow equations using Nutils, while the **3D domain** is solved using OpenFOAM.  
Both solvers are coupled via preCICE by exchanging the **pressure** and **axial velocity** at the interface.

Two coupling directions are possible:  
- **1D → 3D**: The 1D solver provides the interface pressure to the 3D solver, which responds with velocity.  
- **3D → 1D**: The 3D solver provides the pressure, and the 1D solver returns the velocity.

The initial inlet pressure is set to `p_in = 98100 Pa`.  
The opening valve at the outlet is modeled through a prescribed outlet velocity, which increases linearly from `0` to `1 m/s` over the first `5 s` and remains constant afterwards.  
This sudden valve opening generates pressure disturbances that propagate through the pipe, resulting in the characteristic **pressure wave oscillations** known as the *water hammer* phenomenon.

## Configuration

preCICE configuration for the 1D-3D simulation (image generated using the [precice-config-visualizer](https://precice.org/tooling-config-visualization.html))

![preCICE configuration visualization 1D-3D](images/tutorials-waterhammer-1d3d-precice-config.png)

> preCICE configuration for the 3D-1D simulation (image generated using the [precice-config-visualizer](https://precice.org/tooling-config-visualization.html))

Reviewer: No need to duplicate:

```suggestion
preCICE configuration for the 3D-1D simulation:
```

![preCICE configuration visualization 3D-1D](images/tutorials-waterhammer-3d1d-precice-config.png)

## Available solvers

* OpenFOAM (sonicLiquidFoam). A compressible OpenFOAM solver. For more information, have a look at the [OpenFOAM adapter documentation](https://precice.org/adapter-openfoam-overview.html)

> * Nutils v9. A Python-based finite element framework. For more information, see the [Nutils adapter documentation](https://precice.org/adapter-nutils.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Nutils. A Python-based finite element framework. For more information, see the [Nutils adapter documentation](https://precice.org/adapter-nutils.html). This Nutils solver requires Nutils v9.
```

(for consistency with other tutorials)

## Running the Simulation

First, select which coupling you want to run. This sets the correct `precice-config.xml` symlink:

```bash
# Choose one (1D → 3D or 3D → 1D)
./setcase.sh 1d3d
# or
./setcase.sh 3d1d
```

> Open **two terminals** and start the corresponding participants for your chosen setup.

Reviewer: The default symlink is to `3d1d`, but that scenario only comes next. Let's change that to `1d3d`.

---
title: Partitioned Water Hammer
keywords: OpenFOAM, Nutils, preCICE, geometric-multiscale, fluid, transient
summary: The Partitioned Water Hammer tutorial simulates unsteady pressure wave propagation in pipe systems using different 1D and 3D configurations coupled via preCICE.
---

> 

Reviewer: Also needs to point to the files, see https://github.com/precice/tutorials/pull/704
